# The Scholarly Primitives
The Scholarly Primitives constitute the most generic and principal
parts of any research process in the humanities and form the second
most abstract building blocks of the model. They facilitate the
initial description of research processes in a very abstract but still
generic way and constitute a basis for proceeding to more specific
representations. The proposed set is inspired by the work of Unsworth
(2000), but have been further defined in the context of this project.

## Interpretative Modelling
Interpretative Modelling is the basic Primitive that makes up the
central element in research and serves as a hub for other Primitives.
The process of ’understanding’ is what it represents at its core as it
revolves around the corpus by contextualising and conceptualising its
elements, succes- sively re-aggregating and re-arranging it to finally
be able to externalise ideas are the core activities here.

## Exploration
Exploration is about serendipitously navigating networks of related
information objects that will lead to the creation of the corpus. The
corpus that is then gradually built up will be the subject to more
specific, explorative Scholarly Activities such as searching, or
browsing.

## Aggregation
Aggregation consists basically of arranging or rearranging the corpus
elements. Filtering and sampling are examples of such aggregation
activities that typically result in rearranged elements of the corpus
such as, for instance, the pages of a digital edition arranged
according to their relevance for the research process, or the pieces
of a vase found in an excavation arranged for their reconstruction.

## Augmentation
Augmentation adds to the elements of the corpus. Annotations and
comments are typical examples, but also context links added to
particular elements in the corpus. Such augmentations are results of
research in their own right, even though their potential for
publication is controversial among scholars in the humanities.

## Externalisation
Externalisation means the the manifestation of research result in the
form of e.g. critical texts, textual interpretation or visualisations.
They have to be produced to make the results of interpretative
modelling and therefore the research process 'readable'.
